





CHAPTER IX  THE MEANING OF MEANING  Father t these are terrible words, but I have no tune now but for Meanings —Meltnoth the Wanderer.  A STUDY of the utterances of Philosophers suggests that they are not to be trusted in their dealings with Meaning. With the material which they have provided before us, let us see whether more creditable results can be achieved by the technique which we have already elaborated.  To begin with it is not difficult to frame two defini- tions corresponding to those of Group A in the case of Beautiful. In two ways it has been easy and natural for philosophers to hypostatize their definiendum ; either by inventing a peculiar stuff, an intrinsic property, and then saying let everything which possesses this be said to possess meaning, or by inventing a special unanalysable relation, and saying let everything related by this relation to something else be said to have a meaning.  With the second of these two definitions a gram- matical alternative is opened up which reappears in all the other suggested definitions and tends very greatly to confuse the discussion. We may either take Meaning as standing for the relation between A and B, when A means B, or as standing for B. In the first case the meaning of A will be its relation to B, in the second it will be B. This ambiguity once it is under- stood gives rise to little difficulty, but the avoidance of it by the symbols ‘ reference ’ and ‘ referent ’ is one of the distinct advantages of that vocabulary.  185   i86  THE MEANING OF MEANING  The other definitions show again a similarity with those of Beautiful in that they are preponderantly psychological definitions. It should not however, be concluded from these two examples that all definition problems develop into psychology. If we were attempt- ing to define ‘ bathing ’ or ‘ absorption,’ let us say, we should find the emphasis upon quite different defining routes. ‘Meaning’ evidently is a symbol some of whose elucidations must rest upon psychology, and the example of Beauty was chosen because that symbol, too, lies though less deeply in the same predicament.  The following is a representative list of the main definitions which reputable students of Meaning have favoured. Meaning is—  A  {  I An Intrinsic property.  II A unique unanalysable Relation to other things.  B  'III The other words annexed to a word in the Dictionary.  IV The Connotation of a word.  V An Essence.  VI An activity Projected into an object.  VII (a) An event Intended.  (b) A Volition.  VIII The Place of anything in a system.  IX The Practical Consequences of a thing in our future experience.  X The Theoretical consequences involved in or implied by a statement.  \ XI Emotion aroused by anything.  C  ' XII That which is Actually related to a sign by a chosen relation.  XIII (a) The Mnemic effects of a stimulus. Asso- ciations acquired.  (b) Some other occurrence to which the mnemic effects of any occurrence are i Appropriate.   THE MEANING OF MEANING  187  (c) That which a sign is Interpreted as being of.  (d) What anything Suggests.  In the case of Symbols.  That to which the User of a Symbol actually refers.  Q XIV That to which the user of a symbol Ought  to be referring  XV That to which the user of a .symbol Believes  himself to be referring.  XVI That to which the Interpreter of a symbol  (a) Refers.  (b) Believes himself to be referring.  (c) Believes the User to be referring  With Group A we need be no further concerned. Let us consider Group B. The first (III) Dictionary meaning, or the philologist’s signification, is, in spite of its comical appearance as formulated above, very widely used; and in the domain of philology it has undoubted value, as will be shown when we come to discuss, in the light of definition XIV, the kindred questions of Good Use and Communication.  Connotation (IV) the ‘ meaning ’ of traditional logic, and Essence (V) the ‘ meaning ’ of the Critical Realists who follow ‘Dr Santayana as quoted above, may be considered together, for ‘ Essences ’ by those who do not let their realism overpower their criticism may best be regarded as Connotation hyposlatized.  The term Connotation has been adopted by those logicians who follow Mill in the practice of discussing as though they were primary and paramount two senses in which a symbol may be said to mean: (i) It means the set of things to which it can be correctly applied ; and the members of this set are said to be denoted or indicated by the word, or to be its denotation. (2) It means the properties used in determining the application of a symbol, the properties in virtue of which anything   l88 THE MEANING OF MEANING  is a member of the set which is the denotation; these properties are said to be the connotation of a symbol, or sometimes simply its meaning. The relation of denotation to connotation has been conveniently summed up as follows : The connotation of a word determines its denotation which in turn determines its compre- hension, t.e., the properties common to the things to which it can be applied. The term connotation is, however, often used with the same sense as compre- hension.  It will be plain to all who consider how words are used that this account is highly artificial. Neither denoting nor connoting can be used as if it were either a simple or a fundamental relation. To take denota- tion first, no word has any denotation apart from some reference which it symbolizes. The relations between a word and the things for which it stands are indirect (cf. diagram. Chapter I., p. ii), and, we have urged, causal. When we add the further complications intro- duced by correct usage, we get a result so artificial that the attempt to use ‘ denoting' as the name of a simple logical relation becomes ludicrous. The case is still worse with ‘connoting.’ The connotation is a selection of properties or adjectives; but properties are not to be found by themselves an5rwhere, they are fictitious or nominal entities which we are led to feign through the influence of the bad analogy by which we treat certain parts of our symbols* as though they were self-complete symbols. We have no justification, beyond this bad analogy, for treating adjectives as though they were nouns The sole entities in the real world are propertied things which are only symbolically distinguishable into properties and things. This does not, of course, make symbolization, which proceeds as though properties and things were separ- able, any less desirable upon occasion. No convenient symbolic device is objectionable so long as we know that it is a device and do not suppose it to be an addition   THE MEANING OF MEANING 189  to our knowledge. To let a convenience turn into an argument, and decide for us as to the nature of the universe in the fashion of Dr Santayana’s ‘ Essences ’ is a gratuitous tactic. On the other hand as linguistic machinery there is no harm and much service in universals. For instance, in expounding the causal or contextual theory of reference we made free use of the terms ‘ character ’ and ‘ relation ’ as though these might stand for independent and respectable elements in the real world. There is a hngmstic necessity for such procedure but to exalt this into a logical necessity for the ‘ subsistence ’ of such elements is to forget what the world is like.  Thus, to begin with, the connotation of a word is a set of nominal entities, but we have still to decide which these shall be. One method would be by linguistic usage ; “a knowledge of the usage of language alone is sufficient to know what a phrase means,” says Mr Johnson (Logic, p. 92). According to this method, if strictly followed, the connotation of a word would be* come indistinguishable from its meaning in the sense of “the other words annexed to a word in the dic- tionary” (III). But another method is possible, the consideration of which will show more plainly still the artificiality of connotation and the little reliance which can be placed in ft for logical purposes; for instance, in definition. We can in part translate the convenient formula given above as follows: The reference employ- ing (or symbolized by) a word determines its referents (i.e., denotation) which in turn determine what different references may be made to them. Two symbols would then have the same connotation when they symbolize similar references. But in our account of reference anything becomes a referent for a given process or act of referring only in virtue of certain characters through which it becomes a completing member of the context including the sign for the process. Thus the connotation of a reference (and derivatively of the words   THE MEANING OF MEANING  190  symbolizing it) would be those characters of its referent in virtue of which this is what is referred to. Bearing in mind that these characters are but nominal entities we can now see how easy it has been for logicians through the formidable shorthand of ‘ denotation ’ and ‘ connotation ’ as applied to words to overlook the causal nature of the relations they were unwittingly discussing. It is not surprising that the attempt to explain the relation of meaning to denotation for phrases like ‘ The King of France ’ by such shorthand methods should have been found difficult.^  One further point amusingly shows the artificiality of the traditional account, namely, the impossibility of applying it to names, which without undue rashness may be regarded as the simplest symbols out of which all our other symbolic machinery has developed. Mill concluded that proper names are non-con notative. Mr Johnson in agreeing with him (and “all the best logicians ”) makes a reservation . *—  “This does not amount to saying that the proper name is non-significant or has no meaning ; rather we find, negatively, that the proper name does not mean the same as anything that could be meant by a descriptive or connotative phrase; and positively, that it does precisely mean what could be indicated by some appropriate descriptive phrase.” Further shifts* are  ^ As for instance by Russell " On Denoting," 1905 “ Thus  it would seem that ' C' and C are difierent entities such that ' C' denotes C, but this cannot be an explanation, because the relation of * C * to C remains wholly mystenous, and where are we to find the denoting complex * C' which is to denote C ? Moreover, when C occurs in a proposition, it is not only the denotation that occurs , yet on the view in question C is only the denotation, the meaning being wholly relegated to * C ' This is an inextricable tangle, and seems to prove that the whole distinction of meaning and denotation has been wrongly conceived " The fresh conceptions, however, de- signed to save the situation have only led to further intricacies which Ic^cians are once more endeavourmg to unravel  * Vol 1 , 1921, p 96  ® ** The word ' courage * or the phrase * not shrinking from danger * IS of snch a nature that there is no distinction between what it means and what it indicates or denotes It is only phrases prefixed by an article or similar term for which the distinction between meaning and indication anses — Ib%d , p 92   THE MEANING OF MEANING 191  then necessary, but serve only to destroy ‘ meaning ’ as a useful symbol.  VI, though it appeals to Empathists, Croceans and Solipsists, is most charitably regarded as a metaphor, in which case it is a strange and striking way of phrasing views closely similar to XIII. Dr Schiller’s way of putting it, “Meaning is an activity taken up towards objects and energetically projected into their, like an a particle,” obscures his actual agreement with the mnemic causation which he is combating; since when he speaks of “a demand we make upon our experience” as “selecting the objects of attention,” he appears to be describing in activist language the very processes (cf. XIII (a) tn/ra) which he is so unwilling to admit. The dispute between ‘ act ’ and ‘ process ’ as fundamental psychological terms is obviously sub- sequent to a full discussion of the problem of Meaning. As is also indicated by Professor Strong’s contribution ^ we presumably have here an instance of a common controversial predicament, the use for the same referents of symbols taken out of different, but to a large extent translatable, symbol systems.  We pass to VII, which arises from the study of such remarks as  j  They meant no harm.  He means well.  I meant to go.  What I meant was what I said.  A mechanistic universe is without meaning.  If, as is usually the case when these phrases are used, we can substitute the word ‘ intend ’ for ‘ mean ’ it will be clear that we have a quite different kind of ‘meaning' from any involved when ‘intention’ cannot  ^ “ The enlargement of the sensationalist-behaviounst theory which appears necessary is, then, to recogmze that the sound as a meaning IS distinct from the sound as a sensuous state, and thai' distmct from both is the thing meant, without the existeuce of which this meaning would have no meamng "— Mvnd, July, xqzx.   192 THE MEANING OF MEANING  be so substituted.’ My ‘meaning’ or ‘intention,’ as that which I endeavour to promote, is something wished, as distinguished from something known or referred to (‘ intended,’ or ‘ tended towards,’ in the terminology of certain American writers). Thus between this sense and that with which we have to deal in such sentences as “‘Chien’ and ‘Dog,’both mean the same thing,” there is no contradiction. There is, however, a pun, and thanks to the practice of disputants who compound the sense of reference with the sense of intention in the phrase “What I meant was” ( = “ What I intended to refer to was ” or “ what I intended you to refer to was ”) —we have a dangerous source of confusion. The difficulty of making a close examination of the matter under discussion is greatly increased, for what I intended to refer to may be quite other than what I did refer to, a fact which it is important to remember if it is hoped to reach mutual comprehension, and eventually agreement or disagreement.  The intention of the speaker may very naturally be used in conjunction with reference in order to provide complex definitions of meaning for special purposes. To quote from a recent article: “Is the meaning of a sentence that which is in the mind of the speaker at the moment of utterance or that which is in the mind of the listener at the moment of audition? Neither, 1 think.  ^ Logiaans are sometimes led by philological accident to dispute this Thus Joseph, Introduction to Logic, p 131, says. ‘ ‘ Intension ’ naturally suggests what we intend or mean by a term "  Lady Welby, who for twenty years eloquently exhorted philosophers and oUieis to concentrate attention on the meamng of meanmg, par- ticularly in her articles on "Sense, Meamng and Interpretation,” to which reference was made above {Mind, i8g6, p 187, etc ), may have failed to carry conviction by contentmg herself with a vague insistence on Meamng as human intention The distinctions necessary in this field are not always such as could be arrived at merely by a refined Linguistic sense, and neither in her book. What ts Meaning f nor in the later Signifies and Language (1911), where the followmg occurs (p 9)  " The one crucial question in all Expression is its special pro- perty, first of Sense, that in which it is used, then of Meamng as the intention of the user, and, most far-reaching and momentous of all, of implication, of ultimate Significance,"  IS the necessary analysis undertaken, while the issue is further con- fused by echoes of the phraseology of an earher religious phase.   THE MEANING OF MEANING  193  Certainly not that which is in the mind of the listener, for he may utterly misconstrue the speaker’s purpose. But also not that which is in the mind of the speaker, for he may intentionally veil in his utterance the thoughts which are in his brain, and this, of course, he could not do if the meaning of the utterance were precisely that which he held in his brain. I think the following formulation will meet the case : The meaning of any sentence is what the speaker intends to be understood from it by the listenerf ^  ‘ To be understood ’ is here a contraction. It stands for: {d) to be referred to + (d) to be responded with + (<r) to be felt towards referent+ (<f) to be felt towards speaker + (e) to be supposed that the speaker is referring to+ (/) that the speaker is desiring, etc., etc.  These complexities are mentioned here to show how vague are most of the terms which are commonly thought satisfactory in this topic. Such a word as ‘ understand ’ is, unless specially treated, far too vague to serve except provisionally or at levels of discourse where a real understanding of the matter (in the reference sense) is not possible. The multiple functions of speech will be classified and discussed in the following chapter. There it will be seen that the expression of the speaker’s intention is one of the five regular language functions. It should not be stressed unduly, and it should be remembered that as with the other functions its im- portance varies immensely from person to person and from occasion to occasion.  The realization of the multiplicity of the normal language function is vital to a serious approach to the problem of meaning. Here it is only desirable to point out that ‘meaning,’ in the sense of ‘that which the speaker intends the listener to refer to,’ and ‘ meaning,’ in the sense of ‘that which the speaker intends the listener to feel and to do,’ etc., are clearly distinguishable.  1 A. Gardiner, Bnt Jour, of Psych, Vol XII, Part iv., 1922, p. 361.   THE MEANING OF MEANING  194  In many of the more subtle speech situations these distinctions must be recognized and used.  The first of these is particularly concerned in those cases of misdirection which we saw in our first chapter to be so universal. In the case of a successful lie the person deceived makes the reference which the deceiver intends he shall, and if we define ‘ meaning ’ as ‘ that which the speaker intends the listener to refer to,’ the victim will have interpreted the speaker aright. He will have grasped his meaning. But let us consider a more astute interpreter, who, by applying a further inter- pretative process (based, say, upon his knowledge of business methods) arrives either at a mere rejection of the intended reference or at another reference quite different from that intended. In the latter case, if he has hit upon the reference from which the suggested false reference was designed to divert him, he would often be said to have understood the speaker, or to have divined his ‘true meaning.’ This last meaning, it should be observed, is non-symbolic. The sagacious listener merely takes the speaker’s behaviour, including the words he utters, as a set of signs whence to interpret to an intention and a reference in the speaker which nc words passing on the occasion symbolize. The batsman who correctly plays a ‘ googly ’ is making exactly the same kind of interpretation. He guesses the ‘ mean- ing’ of the bowler’s action by discounting certain of the signs exhibited.  All cases of ‘duplicity,’ whether deliberate (inten- tional) or not, may be analysed in the same manner; ^ the special instance of self-deception as it concerns introspective judgments, which are discussed below, being of most importance for the general theory. Here great care is required in avoiding any confusion between the speaker’s intended or professed references and his actual references.  ^ On this point Martinak's treatment {Psychologtsche Untersuchttngen tur Bedeuiungslehre, p 82) of the art of the orator, the diplomat, the trickster and the liar is instructive   THE MEANING OF MEANING 195  This particular ambiguity is indeed one of the most undesirable of those with which we have to deal. U nless the referential and the affective-volitional aspects of mental process are clearly distinguished, no discussion of their relation is possible ; and the confusion of refer- ence, with one very special form of the latter aspect, namely ‘ intending,’is disastrous. To bring the point out by a play of words, we very often mean what we do not mean ; t.e,, we refer to what we do not intend, and we are constantly thinking of things which we do not want to think of. ‘ Mean ’ as shorthand for ‘ intend to refer to,’ is, in fact, one of the unluckiest symbolic devices possible.  The distinction between the two aspects of mental process from the standpoint of the context theory may be briefly and therefore vaguely indicated as follows: Given the psychological context to which a sign belongs, then the reference made by the interpretation of the sign is fixed also. But it is possible for the same sign (or for signs with very similar characters) to belong to different psychological contexts. Certain geometrical figures, that may be seen, more or less ‘ at will,’ either as receding or as extruding from the plane upon which they are drawn offer well-known and convenient examples. If now we raise the question. How does the sign come to belong to the context to which it does belong, or how does It pass from one context to another? we are raising questions as to the affective-volitional aspect. The facts, concerning habit-formation, desire, affective tone, upon the basis of which these questions must be answered, are to some extent ascertained; but pending the dis- covery of further facts and an hypothesis by which they can be interpreted and arranged, it remains possible to speculate upon the matter either in activist or in auto- matist language. Which kind of language gives scientifically the most adequate symbolism, or whether a neutral symbolism is not possible, are matters as to which It IS premature to decide. Meanwhile there is no   196 THE MEANING OF MEANING  excuse for making a confused statement of an unsolved and difficult problem into a chief instrument of all our inquiries, which is what we should be doing if we admitted ‘ meaning ’ in the sense here discussed as a fundamental conception.  As regards VII (b) those who are not clear as to the scope of the equation, “ His meaning is certain,” = “ He has definite wishes,” often find themselves led to the conclusion that ‘ meaning’ = ‘ wishes’= ‘ volition ’ (a mental event), t.e., is entirely psychological, or as they are often pleased to say, purely personal.* The same linguistic ambiguity often arises again when the Universe is regarded as showing evidence of a will or design, and if ‘ meaning ’ is substituted for the ‘ intention ’ or ‘ purpose ’ of such a will, then the meaning of anything will be its purpose—as conceived by the speaker qua interpreter of the divine plan ; or, for biological teleo- logists with a partiality for the ilan vital —its function. Such a phrase as the Meaning of Life (cf., for example. Professor Munsterberg’s treatment above) usually implies such a view, but there is sometimes another possible interpretation when Meaning is equated with ‘ Signific- ance ’ (VIII). Here the notion of purpose is not always implied, and the meaning of anything is said to have been grasped when it has been understood as related to other things or as having its place in some system as a whole.  Good examples of both these uses are provided by Mr Russell, and it is hardly necessary to add that, as here used by him, both are innocuous and convenient locutions. At the close of the immortal account by Mephistopheles of the history of our cosmos, we read: “Such, in outline, but even more purposeless, more void of meaning, is the world which Science presents  ^ Another mode of introducing the personal touch is to equate * my meanmg ' with ‘ my ideas,' whether of, or not of, anything, as when a disputant declares that she has expressed her meamng imperfectly, but claims that ideas are so personal and intangible that they can never be adequately * expressed'   THE MEANING OF MEANING 197  for our belief.” And again, in relation to the haphazard treatment of mathematics in text-books: “The love of system can find free play in mathematics as nowhere else. The learner who feels this impulse must not be repelled by an array of meaningless examples or dis- tracted by amusing oddities.”^  The kind of system within which the thing, said in this sense to have ‘ meaning,’ is taken as fitting is not important. Designs or intentions, human or other, form one sub-class of such systems, but there are many others. For example, some people were said to be slow in grasping the ‘ meaning ’ of the declaration of war; in other words, they did not easily think of the consequences of all kinds which were causally linked with that event. Similarly we may ask what is the ‘ meaning’ of unemployment.  The theologian will elucidate the ‘ meaning ’ of sin by explaining the circumstances of Adam’s fall and the history and destiny of the soul. Similarly the ' meaning ’ of top hats may flash across the mind of a sociologist when he recognizes them as part of the phenomena of conspicuous ostentation.  “I doubt,” says Mr Stanley Leathes, “if numerical dates have any meaning to the majority of children. I once asked a Sunday school boy : How long ago Our Lord had lived? He replied; ‘Forty days.’”* The complaint is not that the dates do not‘suggest’ anything, but presumably that their ‘ significance ’ in the general measurement of time has not been grasped by the puerile mind. The figures for the distances of remote stars are similarly said to be without ‘ meaning' for us all.  But ‘ meaning ’ in this sense is too vague to be of much service even to orators. Is the meaning of unemployment its causes or its effects, its effects taken sociologically, or as the unemployed individual suffers  ^ op cit, Mysttctstn and Logic, pp 47 and 66 * What IS Education 7 , p 178.   198 THE MEANING OF MEANING  them? Accordingly various restrictions are commonly introduced by aid of which more specific senses of ‘ meaning,’ as place within some system, are obtained. Two of them are sufficiently important to rank as independent definitions of meaning, since each has been made the keystone of a metaphysical edifice, namely ‘ meaning’ as practical and as the theoretical consequences. In both cases the ‘ meaning’ is the rest of the system within which whatever has the ‘ meaning ’ is taken. We shall find another narrower and a more scientific variety of this ‘ meaning’ in use when we come to consider natural signs.  The account of meaning in terms of Practical Consequences (IX) is chiefly associated with the pragmatists. William James himself considers that “the meaning of any proposition can always be brought down to some particular consequence in our future practical experience, whether passive or active,”^ or as he puts it in Pragmatism (p. 201): “True ideas are those that we can assimilate, validate, corroborate, verify. False ideas are those that we can not. That is the practical difference it makes to us to have true ideas, that, therefore, is the meaning of truth, for it is all that truth is known as.”  Correspondingly there are those who introduce the word ‘means’ into their prose as a synonym for ‘involves’ or ‘logically implies’ (X). All or any of the theoretical consequences of a view or statement are thus included in common philosophic pdrlance in its ‘meaning,’ as when we are told (Mind, 1908, p. 491) that “ while to Spinoza insistence on ends alone means ignorance of' causes, to Prof. Laurie insistence on causes alone means ignorance of ends.”  XI (Emotion) requires little comment. It is a definite sense of meaning which except amongst men of letters is not likely to be brought in to confuse other issues. A separate treatment of the emotional use of •• W James, The Meaning of Truth, p 210   THE MEANING OF MEANING  199  language will be found in the following chapter, where what has already been said on this subject receives application. Some typical instances of the emotional use of meaning were provided in the preceding chapter. The word is often purely emotive (cf. ‘Good’ p. 125), and on these occasions, if the writer is what is known as a stylist, will have no substitute nor will a sensible reader attempt a symbolic definition.  The detailed examination of this sense of meaning is almost equivalent to an investigation of Values, such as has been attempted by Professor W. M. Urban in his formidable treatise on the subject, where ‘worth- predicates ' appear as ‘ funded affective-volitional meanings.’ “The words ‘God,’‘love,’‘liberty,’have a real emotional connotation, leave a trail of affective meaning. . . . We may quite properly speak of the emotional connotation of such words as the funded meaning of previous emotional reactions and the affective abstracts which constitute the psychical correlates of this meaning as the survivals of former judgment-feelings.”^ It is regrettable that Urban’s taste for the collocation of forbidding technicalities should have prevented a more general acquaintance with views for the most part so sound and so carefully expounded.  Proceeding then to the third group we have first (XII) the definition which embodies the doctrine of natural signs. Any one event will, it is generally assumed, be connected with other events in a variety of ways. Any one event will be actually related causally or temporally or in some other way to other events so that, taking this event as a sign in respect of some one such relation, there will be another event which is Its meaning, t.e., the relatum so related. Thus the effect of the striking of a match is either a flame, or smoke, or the head falling off, or merely a scraping noise or an exclamation. In this case the 1 Valuatton, p I 33   200  THE MEANING OF MEANING  actual effect is the meaning of the scrape, if treated as a sign in this respect, and vice versa.  It is in this sense that the Psycho-analyst often speaks of the meaning of dreams. When he discovers the ‘meaning’ of some mental phenomenon, what he has found is usually a conspicuous part of the cause, and he rarely makes any other actual use of the word. But by introducing theories of unconscious wishes, ‘meaning’ in the sense of something unconsciously intended, and by introducing ‘ universal symbols,’ kings, queens, etc., ‘ meaning ’ in the sense of some intrinsic property of the symbol, may easily come to be what he believes himself to be discussing. In other words, for him as for all natural scientists the causal sign-relations are those which have the greatest interest.  In passing from this sense of ‘meaning’ to XIII, which must be carefully distinguished, we have to recall the account of interpretation given above. All thinking, all reference, it was maintained, is adaptation due to psychological contexts which link together elements in external contexts. However ‘ universal ’ or however ‘ abstract ’ our adaptation, the general account of what is happening is the same. In this fashion we arrive at a clear and definite sense of ‘meaning.’ According to this the meaning of A is that to which the mental process interpreting A is adapted.^ This is the most important sense in which words have meaning.  In the case of simple interpretations, such as the recognition of a sound, this adaptation is not difficult to explain. In more complex interpretations such as the reader is attempting to carry out at this moment, a detailed account is more difficult, partly because such interpretations go by stages, partly because few im- portant psychological laws have as yet been ascertained and these but vaguely. To take an analogous case, before Newton’s time sciehtists were in much doubt ^ Cf Chapter III, supra, pp 53, 75   THE MEANING OF MEANING  201  as to the ‘meaning’ of tidal phenomena, and peculiar ‘sympathy’ and ‘affinity’ relations used to be postu- lated in order to connect them with the phases of the moon ‘the ruler of the waters.’ Further knowledge of more general uniformities made it possible to dispense with such phantom relations. Similarly more accurate knowledge of psychological laws will enable relations such as ‘meaning,’ ‘knowing,’ ‘being the object of,’ ‘ awareness ’ and ‘ cognition ’ to be treated as linguistic phantoms also, their place being taken by observable correlations.  The most usual obj'ections to such a view as this derive from undue reliance upon introspection. Intro- spective judgments like other judgments are interpreta- tions. Whether we judge ‘ I am thinking of rain,'or, after looking at the barometer, judge ' It is going to rain ’; we are equally engaged in a sign situation. In both cases we are making a secondary adaptation to a previous adaptation as sign, or more usually to some part or concomitant of the adaptation ; such as, for instance, the words symbolizing the reference about which we are attempting to judge in introspection, or, falling words, some non-verbal symbol, or, failing even that, the obscure feelings accompanying the reference. It is possible of course to respond directly to our own responses. We do this constantly in long trains of habitual and perceptual actions ; but such responses being themselves non-conscious, t.e., conscious of noth- ing, do not lead to introspection judgments of the kind which provide evidence for or against any view as to the nature of thinking. Such judgments, since they must appear to rest upon the reflective scrutiny of con- sciousness itself, are interpretations whose signs are taken from whatever conscious elements accompany the references they are about. It is certain that these signs are unreliable and difficult to interpret; often they are no more than dim, vague feelings. We therefore tend to introduce symbolization, hoping so to gain additional   202 THE MEANING OF MEANING  and clearer signs. When, for instance, we attempt what is called the analysis of a judgment by direct introspection our procedure leads as a rule to the pro- vision of alternative symbols which we endeavour to convince ourselves symbolize the same reference. We then say that one symbol is what we mean by the other. In most modern arguments concerning fundamentals some positive or negative assertion of this form can be found as an essential step. It is thus very important to consider what kind of evidence is available for such assertions.  The usual answer would be that it is a matter not of evidence but of immediate conviction. But these direct certainties notoriously vary from hour to hour and are different in different persons. They are in fact feelings, and as such their causes, if they can be investigated, will be found not irrelevant to the question of their validity. Now the main cause of any con- viction as to one symbol being the correct analysis of another, as to the identity of the references sym- bolized by both, is to be found in the similarity of any other signs of the references in question which may be obtainable. These, since imagery is admittedly often irrelevant, will be feelings again :—feelings accompany- ing the references, feelings of fitness or unfitness, due to the causal connections of symbols to references, and feelings due to the mere superficial similarities and dissimilarities of the symbols. Thus it is this tangled and obscure network of feelings which is the ground of our introspective certainties. It is not surprising that the task of clarifying our opinions by the method of direct inspection and analysis should be found difficult, or that the results obtained should give rise to controversy.  Those who have attempted to decide what precisely they are judging when they make the commonest judg- ments, such as ‘I am thinking,’ ‘That is a chair,’ ‘ This is good ’ will not be in haste to dispute this.   THE MEANING OF MEANING 203  It is indeed very likely that we more often make mis- takes in these secondary judgments than in most others, for the obvious reason that verification is so difficult. Nobody’s certainty as to his reference, his ‘ meaning,’ is of any value in the absence of corroborative* evidence, though this kind of self-confidence dies hard.  It is because the non-verbal sensations and images which accompany references are such unreliable signs that symbols are so important. We usually take our symbolization as our guide to our meaning, and the accompanying sign feelings become indistinguishably merged in the feelings of our symbols. The fact, how- ever, that on some occasions all the available symbols can be felt to be inappropriate to the reference which they are required to symbolize, shows that other feeling- signs are attainable. We are thus not completely at the mercy of our symbols.  None the less, there are obvious reasons for that prodigious trustfulness in symbols as indications of what we are meaning which is characteristic of mathe- matical and other abstract thinkers Symbols properly used are for such subjects indispensable substitutes for feeling accompaniments not so easily distinguished. The feeling accompanying, for instance, a reference to 102 apples IS not easily distinguishable from that accompanying a reference to 103, and without the symbols we should be unable to make either reference as distinct from the other. In abstract thought as a rule and for most thinkers, instead of our references determining our symbols, the linkage and inter- connection of the symbols determines our reference.  ^ The precise kinds of this corroborative evidence and their value, 1 e , the allied signs or the relevant behaviour, are matters for in- vestigation Most word-iissociation experiments, for instance, are conducted on dubious assumptions The problem of the relation of non-verbal signs and verbal signs (t e , symbols) to the judgment processes of 'which they are signs, has therefore not often been raised Since so much experimental psychology must stand or fall with the quite uncritical assumptions as to the value of symbolization as evidence of reference upon which such experiments are conducted, this problem would seem to be worthy of attention   THE MEANING OF MEANING  204  We merely watch that no violation of certain rules of procedure is brought about. Some of these rules are of no great importance, those recorded in the parts of grammar which deal with literary usage and the con- ventions of sentence formation. Others however are of quite a different standing and are due to nothing less than the nature of things in general. In other words these rules are logical laws in the sense that any symbol system which does not obey them must break down as a means of recording references, no matter to what the references be made. These fundamental necessities of a symbol system and the mere rules of polite speech above mentioned have historically been subjected to some confusion. We had occasion to discuss some of the former in Chapter V. ; some of the latter will receive mention and comment when we come to deal with Symbol Situations in our final chapter.  Subject to these logical requirements we are able, largely by means of symbols defined in terms of one another, to compound references, or, in other words, to abstract common parts of different references—to dis- tinguish, to compare and to connect references in, to, and at, various levels of generality. The compounding of these diverse modes of adaptation into a specific judgment is the process generally alluded to as Think- ing, this activity being commonly maintained through any long train by the use of symbols. These, as substitutes for stimuli not available at any given instant, as retaining the product of elaborate concatenations of adjustments, and as affording means for the rearrange- ment of these adjustments, have become so powerful, so mechanical and so intricately interconnected as to conceal from us almost entirely what is taking place. We come to regard ourselves as related to a variety of entities, properties, propositions, numbers, functions, universals and so forth—by the unique relation of know- ledge. Recognized for what they are, i.e , symbolic devices, these entities may be of great use. The attempt   THE MEANING OF MEANING 205  to investigate them as referents leads, as we have seen, to Philosophy, and constitutes the unchallenged domain of philosophers.  It will be noticed that definitions (XII) and (Xlllh) for the case of true interpretations have the same effect. The meaning (Xlllb) of a sign adequately interpreted will be that to which it is actually related by the sign relation. But for the case of false interpretations the two ‘meanings’ will be different. Another point of interest is that this account removes the necessity for any ‘Correspondence Theory of Truth’ since an adequate reference has as its referent not something which corresponds to the fact or event which is the mean- ing of a sign by definition (XII) but something which IS identical with it. We may if we please say that a reference corresponds with its referent, but this would be merely shorthand for the fuller account of reference which we have given.  With these considerations before us we can now understand the peculiarities of Symbols with their two- fold ‘meaning’ for speaker and hearer. A symbol as we have defined it (cf. pp. ii, 12 supra) symbolizes an act of reference ; that is to say, among its causes in the speaker, together no doubt with desires to record and to communicate, and with attitudes assumed towards hearers, are acts of referring. Thus a symbol becomes when uttered, in virtue of being so caused, a sign to a hearer of an act of reference. But this act, except where difficulty in understanding occurs, is of little interest in Itself, and the symbol is usually taken as a sign of what it stands for, namely that to which the reference which It symbolizes refers. When this interpretation is successful It follows that the hearer makes a reference similar in all relevant respects to that made by the speaker. It is this which gives symbols their peculiarity as signs. Thus a language transaction or a communica- tion may be defined as a use of symbols in such a way that acts of reference occur in a hearer which are similar   2o6 the meaning of MEANING  in all relevant respects to those which are symbolized by them in the speaker.  From this point of view it is evident that the problem for the theory of communication is the delimitation and analysis of psychological contexts, an inductive problem exactly the same in form as the problems of the other sciences. Owing, however, to the difficulty of observ- ing psychological events and the superficial nature of the uniformities hitherto observed, the methods employed in testing whether communication has or has not taken place are indirect. Since we are unable to observe references directly we have to study them through signs, either through accompanying feelings or through symbols. Feelings are plainly insufficient and symbols afford a far more sensitive indication.^ But symbols also mislead and some method of control has to be devised ; hence the importance of definition. Where there is reason to rely upon the indicative power of symbols, no doubt a language purged of all alternative locutions is scientifically desirable. But in most matters the possible treachery of words can only be controlled through definitions, and the greater the number of such alternative locutions available the less is the risk of discrepancy, provided that we do not suppose symbols to have ‘ meaning’ on their own account, and so people the world with fictitious entities.  The question of synonyms leads us naturally to the consideration of (XIV) Good Use. We have already seen what correctness of symbolization involves. A symbol is correct when it causes a reference similar to that which it symbolizes in any suitable interpreter. Thus for any given group of symbol users there will arise a certain fixity of something which will be called  * The extent to which we rely upon symbols to show us what we are doing, is illustrated by the recently reported case of the Bishop who mislaid bis railway ticket  " It's quite all right, my lord 1 ” said the Inspector, who was also a Churchwarden  " No, it isn't,” replied the Bishop '* How can I know where I am going to without it ? ”   THE MEANING OF MEANING 207  proper meaning or Good Use. This something tends to be spoken of as the meaning of the words in question. What is fixed is the reference which any member of this group will make in interpreting a symbol on any occa- sion within the relevant universe of discourse. It is no doubt very important that these meanings should not vary beyond narrow limits. But we may be legitimately anxious to maintain uniform standards of comparison without finding it necessary to suppose them supernaturally established or in their own nature immutable. The belief which is so common that words necessarily mean what they do derives from the ambiguity of the term ‘ necessary,’ which may stand either for the fact that this is a requisite of communica- tion or for the supposed possession by words of intrinsic ‘ meanings.’ Thus it has been argued that such a word as Good has no synonym and is irreplaceable, so that persons making good use of this word will have an idea which they cannot otherwise symbolize-—from which it is held to follow that, since the word is certainly used, there must be a unique and simple ethical idea, or, as is sometimes said, a unique property or predicate, whether possessed by anything or not. In a precisely similar fashion mathematicians a^e apt to aver that if nothing whatever existed, there would yet be the property of ‘ being 107 in number,’  These fixities in references are for the most part supported and maintained by the use of Dictionaries, and for many purposes ‘ dictionary-meaning’ and ‘ good use ’ would be equivalents. But a more refined sense of dictionary-meaning may be indicated. The dictionary is a list of substitute symbols. It says in effect: “ This can be substituted for that in such and such circum- stances.” It can do this because in these circumstances and for suitable interpreters the references caused by the two symbols will be sufficiently alike. The Dic- tionary thus serves to mark the overlaps between the references of symbols rather than to define their fields.   208 THE MEANING OF MEANING  The two remaining definitions of our list (XV., XVI.) arise through this difficulty in the control of symbols as indications of reference. As we have seen, the reference which the user of a symbol believes him- self, thanks to his trust in the symbol, to be making may be quite different from that which he is actually making; a fact which careful comparison of locutions often reveals. Similarly the reference made by a hearer will often be quite unlike that made by the speaker. The final case, in which the meaning of a symbol is what the hearer believes the speaker to be referring to, is perhaps the richest of ail in opportunities of mis- understanding.   


